The electron microscope was invented by Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll at the University of Berlin and can achieve higher resolution since electrons have a shorter wavelength (0.1 nm) than light. Its resolution limit is 1-2 nm, roughly 2000 times better than traditional microscopes and 300 times better than that of super resolution models. There are three main types of electron microscopes:
#### Transmission Electron Microscope
The specimen is stained with heavy metal salts, which provide contrast by scattering electrons. A beam of electrons is then passed through the specimen, forming an image on the screen. The electrons hitting heavy metals are deflected, darkening stained areas. Here, the electron beam targets a specific area, with transmitted electrons being focused by lenses onto a detector. Since the electrons are high energy (80-300 keV), it allows penetration of materials. TEM examins internal structure and offers magnification from 2000 to 1 million times.
Biological specimens require special preparation for TEM. The samples are chemically fixed, dehydrated and impregnated with liquid plastic which after hardening is cut into sections 5-100 nm thick. For the structures to be seen, sample is stained with heavy metals like uranium and lead.
The staining can be done in two ways: Using heavy metals (osmium tetroxide, uranyl acetate and lead citrate) to bind cell structures which appear dark in the image, called **positive** staining; Placing the specimen on a film, stained with heavy metals and then surrounded by electron dense stain, making an image where specimen appears light on a dark background, called *negative* staining, typically used to image bacteria, viruses, organelles, cytoskeletal filaments, proteins and nucleic acids.
The electrons in TEM are extracted from a heated filament, accelerated by an electric field, and focused by a magnetic condenser lens. Electrons transmitted are focused by a magnetic objective and projector lenses to form a magnified image on a detector, such as a fluorescent screen, photographic film, or CCD camera.
#### Scanning Electron Microscope
SEM provides a 3D image of cells by coating their surface with heavy metal and scanning with an electron beam. It offers high magnification of 10-500,000 times with a resolving power around 10 nm, limted by metal coating thickness. The electrons are focused by a condenser and objective lenses on a metal coated specimen. Scanning coils move the beam across the specimen, and electrons scattered from the metal are collected by a photomultiplier tube.

TEM and SEM are advantageous in the fact we get very high magnification and resolution, however we cannot view live specimens. The electron's penetration power is also low, so the object should be ultra thin before imaging. They only work in a vacuum and are very expensive and cumbersome to use.

#### Cryoelectron Microscopy
In cryoelectron microscopy, a sample in aqueous suspension is applied to a grid, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and maintained using a special mount. The frozen sample is then placed in an electron microscope, and the very low temperature of $-196 \degree\text{C}$ prevents water evaporation, even in a vacuum, which lets us observe a hydrated state without fixation or heavy metal staining. A semicircular series of 2D projection images is recorded from a 3D specimen, and the 3D structure is reconstructed from these multiple images.

Links: [[Proteomics]]
Date created: Fri/17/Apr/2026